+++
title = 'Cultivating the Natural State'
date = 2024-06-13T12:00:00-04:00
authors = ["Xavier Snelgrove"]
+++

I skipped last week's reflection, as I was on a retreat. Before you dock me a
few points hear me out, there's a sense in which this retreat is field research
for my project. The leader Bonnitta Roy is an independent scholar and
philosopher who runs an online Zoom/Substack philosophy community called [The
Pop-Up School](https://bonnittaroy.substack.com/). This retreat, on "Cultivating
the Natural State" was an in-person gathering in rural Vermont of primarily
people in the the Pop-Up School's community.

Roys community is interesting on many levels. She's doing work which is academic
in flavour, but because she does not have the constraints that the conventional
academic discipline might impose, so there is also the feeling that you're
participating in something *new*. Something that doesn't fit into the existing
boxes, but perhaps rhymes with them.

A theme of the retreat was on "left-brain right-brain integration", and this was
reflected in its content which would run from embodiment exercises and group
music jamming, all the way to very verbal and diagrammatic expositions of Roy's
ongoing metaphysics development project. Her interests span this range, and
therefore so does the community she attracts. The attendees were striking in
their breadth, we had people in their 20s and people in their 70s, we had German
web developers, fourth generation Idaho herbalists, Haitian-Canadian community
activists, academics, recovering housewives and recovering 1960s acid-heads.

My father quit his second tenured academic job to enter industry in my early
childhood (the inability to focus runs deep in this family). One thing he told
me he appreciated when he left academia was precisely the *diversity* of folks
he would work with. He went from leading labs of exclusively 20-30-something
technological-neurotype keeners who had always been top of their class to being
in orgs with Japanese salespeople and ex-military folk and future librarians and
technical writers and marketing gurus and alcoholic entrepreneurs.

Sons are cursed to rebel against their fathers while ultimately just playing out
the ongoing oscillation of the same dielectics. I have spent more of my adult
life in industry, never quite figuring out the academic path, (though perhaps it
was just an easier path for those coddled boomers), and so the longing for me,
the longing which has led me to pursuing this fellowship in the first place, has
been away from the economic imperative which is the totalizing frame of
industry. Academia is the other obvious pole for people of my typeâ€”yes there is
a huge negative space of other things I'm leaving out, non-profits, healthcare,
government, art, military, activism, crime, marrying rich, but these are not on
the particular samsara loop of my lineage.

So this is why Roy's subculture is fascinating to me. She is running a community
of teaching and learning, but it is not just a re-hashing of the existing
institutions. She does not have that monocultural tendency which ultimately
disheartened my father. She is very comfortable with trans- or perhaps even
anti-disciplinary engagement. She's not attracting "the usual suspects" of
participants. She's not chasing "the usual metrics". There's something new she's
trying.

I will see if I can interview her as part of my research. Understand whether she
has a theory of pedagogy. A theory of knowledge production.
***

*Xavier's research reflections. [Previous reflection]({{<ref "wxs-reflection-002.md">}}). [Next reflection]({{<ref "wxs-reflection-004.md">}})*
